Add Fuchsia platform support documentation (#99831)
rust-lang/rust: src/doc/rustc/src/platform-support/fuchsia.md

# `aarch64-fuchsia` and `x86_64-fuchsia`

**Tier: 2**

[Fuchsia] is a modern open source operating system that's simple, secure,
updatable, and performant.

[Fuchsia]: https://fuchsia.dev/

## Target maintainers

The [Fuchsia team]:

> [Fuchsia team]: https://team-api.infra.rust-lang.org/v1/teams/fuchsia.json

Reviewer: Linking to the teams API is a nice idea. I wonder if we should just do that to avoid getting out of sync. Maybe a note to the effect of "if these differ, consider this link to be authoritative"?

Also, I'd like to say that the preferred way to contact Fuchsia maintainers is to use `@rustbot ping fuchsia` instead of pinging individual members.

Author: Updated language to clarify that.

- Tyler Mandry ([@tmandry](https://github.com/tmandry))
- Dan Johnson ([@computerdruid](https://github.com/computerdruid))
- David Koloski ([@djkoloski](https://github.com/djkoloski))
- Andrew Pollack ([@andrewpollack](https://github.com/andrewpollack))
- Joseph Ryan ([@P1n3appl3](https://github.com/P1n3appl3))

## Requirements

This target is cross-compiled from a host environment. Development may be done
from the [source tree] or using the Fuchsia SDK.

[source tree]: https://fuchsia.dev/fuchsia-src/get-started/learn/build

> Fuchsia targets support std and follow the `sysv64` calling convention. Fuchsia

Reviewer: Does this apply to arm?

Author: No, sysv64 is an x86 calling convention only. We (almost certainly) use Aarch64 calling convention on arm.

binaries use the ELF file format.

## Building the target

Before building Rust for Fuchsia, you'll need a clang toolchain that supports

> Fuchsia as well. You can download a [prebuilt one] from CIPD Packages or follow

Reviewer: The guide (and CIPD package) are meant for building the Fuchsia platform, not necessarily to be used in the SDK. I'm not sure the toolchain team wants to expand their support beyond that. Can we just say that a recent clang 14+ will work?

Author: Updated wording, removed link to prebuilt clang.

the guide for [building your own clang toolchain].

[prebuilt one]: https://chrome-infra-packages.appspot.com/p/fuchsia/third_party/clang
[building your own clang toolchain]: https://fuchsia.dev/fuchsia-src/development/build/toolchain

You'll also need a recent copy of the [Fuchsia SDK], which provides the tools
and binaries required to build and link programs for Fuchsia.

[Fuchsia SDK]: https://chrome-infra-packages.appspot.com/p/fuchsia/sdk/core

x86-64 and AArch64 Fuchsia targets can be enabled using the following
configuration.

In `config.toml`, add:

```toml
[llvm]

> targets = "X86;AArch64"

Reviewer: From my reading of `config.toml.example` these are both included as defaults. We configure this ourselves to reduce the set of targets built into LLVM, but it isn't necessary.

Author: Removed.

[build]

> target = ["aarch64-fuchsia", "x86_64-fuchsia"]

Reviewer: The user probably wants to retain their host platform here, or things like proc macros won't work.

Author: Added a spot for the user to insert their own host platform.

[rust]

> llvm-libunwind = "in-tree"

Reviewer: See https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/93604. This can now be configured per-target like this:

```toml
[target.x86_64-fuchsia]
llvm-libunwind = "in-tree"
[target.aarch64-fuchsia]
llvm-libunwind = "in-tree"
```

Configuring globally works in our builder the way we have it set up for host, but I can't say for sure that it would work in all cases, so it's best to configure per-target like this. (Note: I want to make "in-tree" the default for Fuchsia once we get the sysroot bumped, so this is no longer necessary. cc @andrewpollack)

Author: Oh cool, I like that a lot better. Updated.

Reviewer 2: Is this working correctly? there was some confusion about this when @djkoloski was showing this to me today

example, using a script like `config-env.sh`):

```sh
export CFLAGS_aarch64_fuchsia="--target=aarch64-fuchsia --sysroot=${SDK_PATH}/arch/arm64/sysroot -I${SDK_PATH}/pkg/fdio/include"
export CXXFLAGS_aarch64_fuchsia="--target=aarch64-fuchsia --sysroot=${SDK_PATH}/arch/arm64/sysroot -I${SDK_PATH}/pkg/fdio/include"
export LDFLAGS_aarch64_fuchsia="--target=aarch64-fuchsia --sysroot=${SDK_PATH}/arch/arm64/sysroot -L${SDK_PATH}/arch/arm64/lib"
export CARGO_TARGET_AARCH64_FUCHSIA_RUSTFLAGS="-C link-arg=--sysroot=${SDK_PATH}/arch/arm64/sysroot -Lnative=${SDK_PATH}/arch/arm64/sysroot/lib -Lnative=${SDK_PATH}/arch/arm64/lib"
export CFLAGS_x86_64_fuchsia="--target=x86_64-fuchsia --sysroot=${SDK_PATH}/arch/x64/sysroot -I${SDK_PATH}/pkg/fdio/include"
export CXXFLAGS_x86_64_fuchsia="--target=x86_64-fuchsia --sysroot=${SDK_PATH}/arch/x64/sysroot -I${SDK_PATH}/pkg/fdio/include"
export LDFLAGS_x86_64_fuchsia="--target=x86_64-fuchsia --sysroot=${SDK_PATH}/arch/x64/sysroot -L${SDK_PATH}/arch/x64/lib"
export CARGO_TARGET_X86_64_FUCHSIA_RUSTFLAGS="-C link-arg=--sysroot=${SDK_PATH}/arch/x64/sysroot -Lnative=${SDK_PATH}/arch/x64/sysroot/lib -Lnative=${SDK_PATH}/arch/x64/lib"
```

> `SDK_PATH` must be an environment variable containing the path to the downloaded

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where `SDK_PATH` is an environment variable containing the path to the downloaded
```

The wording suggested to me that there is a general requirement for this variable to exist. But I think it's only used for the purposes of this guide.

As an alternative suggestion, you could include the setting of `SDK_PATH` in the snippet above and tell them to fill in the rest of the line.

Author: Updated wording.

Fuchsia SDK. These can be run together in a shell environment by executing
`(source config-env.sh && ./x.py install)`.

## Building Rust programs

After compiling Rust binaries, you'll need to build a component, package it, and
serve it to a Fuchsia device or emulator. All of this can be done using the
Fuchsia SDK.

As an example, we'll compile and run this simple program on a Fuchsia emulator:

**`hello_fuchsia.rs`**
```rust
fn main() {
    println!("Hello Fuchsia!");
}

#[test]
fn it_works() {
    assert_eq!(2 + 2, 4);
}
```

Create a new file named `hello_fuchsia.rs` and fill out its contents with that
code.

### Create a package

On Fuchsia, a package is the unit of distribution for software. We'll need to
create a new package directory where we will place files like our finished
binary and any data it may need. The working directory will have this layout:

> ```

Reviewer: Here and below: Needs `notrust` language marker to avoid being compiled as a doctest (see CI)

hello_fuchsia.rs
hello_fuchsia.cml
package
┣━ bin
┃  ┗━ hello_fuchsia
┣━ meta
┃  ┣━ package
┃  ┗━ hello_fuchsia.cm
┗━ hello_fuchsia.manifest
```

Make the `package`, `package/bin`, and `package/meta` directories and create the
following files inside:

**`package/meta/package`**
```json
{"name":"hello_fuchsia","version":0}
```

The `package` file describes our package's name and version number. Every
package must contain one.

**`package/hello_fuchsia.manifest`**
```

> bin/hello_fuchsia=${WORK_DIR}/bin/hello_fuchsia

Reviewer: nit: Using this syntax suggests that environment variable expansion works but I don't think it does

lib/ld.so.1=${SDK_PATH}/arch/${ARCH}/sysroot/dist/lib/ld.so.1

> lib/libfdio.so=${SDK_PATH}/arch/${ARCH}/lib/libfdio.so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lib/libfdio.so=${SDK_PATH}/arch/${ARCH}/dist/libfdio.so
```

Not sure why it's `dist` here and `dist/lib` in the sysroot, but it is.

meta/package=${WORK_DIR}/meta/package
meta/hello_fuchsia.cm=${WORK_DIR}/meta/hello_fuchsia.cm
```

> Where `${WORK_DIR}` is the **absolute** path to the root of your directory.

Reviewer: We don't use absolute paths in our build, so I don't think this is necessary. I think the key is that the paths need to be relative to the directory that `pm` is run from.

Author: Also added a note about that `pm` behavior to the page.

The `.manifest` file will be used to describe the contents of the package by
relating their location when installed to their location on the file system. You
can use this to make a package pull files from other places, but for this
example we'll just be placing everything in the `package` directory.

### Compiling a binary

Using your freshly compiled `rustc`, you can compile a binary for Fuchsia using
the following options:

* `--target x86_64-fuchsia`/`--target aarch64-fuchsia`: Targets the Fuchsia
  platform of your choice

> * `-L ${SDK_PATH}/arch/${ARCH}/lib`: Link against Fuchsia libraries from the SDK
> * `-L ${SDK_PATH}/arch/${ARCH}/sysroot/lib`: Link against Fuchsia kernel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `-Lnative ${SDK_PATH}/arch/${ARCH}/lib`: Link against Fuchsia libraries from the SDK
* `-Lnative ${SDK_PATH}/arch/${ARCH}/sysroot/lib`: Link against Fuchsia kernel
```

  libraries from the SDK

Putting it all together:

```sh
# Configure these for the Fuchsia target of your choice
# TARGET_ARCH={x86_64-fuchsia|aarch64-fuchsia}
# ARCH={x64|aarch64}

> rustc --target ${TARGET_ARCH} -L${SDK_PATH}/arch/${ARCH}/lib -L${SDK_PATH}/arch/${ARCH}/sysroot/lib -o package/bin/hello_fuchsia hello_fuchsia.rs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rustc --target ${TARGET_ARCH} -Lnative=${SDK_PATH}/arch/${ARCH}/lib -Lnative=${SDK_PATH}/arch/${ARCH}/sysroot/lib -o package/bin/hello_fuchsia hello_fuchsia.rs
```

```

### Bulding a component

> On Fuchsia, components require a component manifest written in CML. Here's a

Reviewer: This prompts the question "what's CML", you can link to https://fuchsia.dev/fuchsia-src/concepts/components/v2/component_manifests or https://fuchsia.dev/reference/cml

basic one that can run our single binary:

**`hello_fuchsia.cml`**
```
{
    include: [ "syslog/client.shard.cml" ],
    program: {
        runner: "elf",
        binary: "bin/hello_fuchsia",
    },
}
```

Now we can compile that CML into a component manifest:

```sh
${SDK_PATH}/tools/${ARCH}/cmc compile hello_fuchsia.cml --includepath ${SDK_PATH}/pkg -o package/meta/hello_fuchsia.cm
```

`--includepath` tells the compiler where to look for `include`s from our CML.
In our case, we're only using `syslog/client.shard.cml`.

### Building a package

Next, we'll build our package as defined by our manifest:

```sh
${SDK_PATH}/tools/${ARCH}/pm -o hello_fuchsia -m package/hello_fuchsia.manifest build
```

And archive it into a single file:

```sh
${SDK_PATH}/tools/${ARCH}/pm -o hello_fuchsia -m package/hello_fuchsia.manifest archive
```

This will produce `hello_fuchsia/hello_fuchsia-0.far` which is the package in

> the Fuchsia Archive Format (FAR).

Reviewer 2: As an alternative to this step, you can produce an output manifest by passing `--output-package-manifest $out_pkg_manifest` to `pm build` and then publish that with `pm publish --repo repo -lp -f <(echo "$out_pkg_manifest")`

Package archives produced by `pm archive` are only needed if you need to like email the package to someone; if you're just planning to publish it into a package repository it's not necessary (and is slower, since it has to make an extra copy of all the files)

### Making a package repo

To serve the package, we'll need to create a package repo:

```sh
${SDK_PATH}/tools/${ARCH}/pm newrepo -repo repo
${SDK_PATH}/tools/${ARCH}/pm publish -a -r repo -f hello_fuchsia/hello_fuchsia-0.far
```

Then we can add it to `ffx`'s package server as `hello-fuchsia` using:

```sh
${SDK_PATH}/tools/${ARCH}/ffx repository add-from-pm repo -r hello-fuchsia
```

### Starting the emulator

Start a Fuchsia emulator in a new terminal using:

```sh
${SDK_PATH}/tools/${ARCH}/ffx product-bundle get workstation_eng.qemu-${ARCH}
${SDK_PATH}/tools/${ARCH}/ffx emu start workstation_eng.qemu-${ARCH} --headless
```

Then, once the emulator has been started:

```sh
${SDK_PATH}/tools/${ARCH}/ffx target repository register
```

And watch the logs from the emulator in a separate terminal:

```sh
${SDK_PATH}/tools/${ARCH}/ffx log --since now
```

Finally, run the component:

```sh
${SDK_PATH}/tools/${ARCH}/ffx component run fuchsia-pkg://hello-fuchsia/hello_fuchsia#meta/hello_fuchsia.cm
```

On reruns of the component, the `--recreate` argument may also need to be
passed.

> ## Testing

Reviewer: This section should mention the rustc test suite since that's mentioned by the template. It's okay to say that we don't yet support running the test suite (maybe with a link to the bug?)
